Heatmaps are a way to visualize
three-dimensional data and
to take advantage of spatial
proximity of those dimensions.
Now, I honestly didn't think I would
include heatmaps in this course.
I've seen enough bad heatmaps
to last me a lifetime.
The problem is heatmaps are really quite
powerful when you have the right data.
Weather data is a great example.
You have two dimensions,
latitude and longitude,
and then we can overlay on top
of this a third dimension, say,
temperature or rainfall amounts and
use color to indicate its intensity.
Here's another good example.
This time from the Australian
Transportation Safety Bureau.
And actually on the Wikipedia page for
Heatmaps, it shows the path of an airline,
Malaysian Airlines 370,
which went missing in 2014.
On top of the flight path is a heatmap
showing the probability of the plane if it
had crashed.
This probability is also displayed as
a continuous value, with cool colors,
blues, being used for
low probabilities and
hot or warm colors, reds,
being used for high probability.
So heatmaps aren't all bad.
But where they break down is when
there's no continuous relationship
between dimensions.
Using a heatmap for categorical data,
for instance, is just plain wrong.
It misleads the viewer into looking for
patterns and
ordering through spatial proximity.
And any such patterns
would be purely spurious.
Okay, now you've have the lecture,
let's talk about the techniques.
In matplotlib, a heatmap is simply a
two-dimensional histogram where the x and
the y values indicate potential points and
the color plotted is
the frequency of the observation.
Earlier, we talked about different
statistical distributions and
they work well for this demonstration.
In fact, let's redo our subplots
where we showed a scatter plot and
two histograms, one for each dimension.
In that we define Y values to come
from the normal distribution and
X values to come from
a random distribution.
To plot this as
a two-dimensional histogram,
we just pass it to the hist2d function.
See how the edge colors on the top and
the bottom are very dark purple,
while there are greens and yellows
in the middle horizon of the image.
Now we talked a bit about what
happens when you increase or
decrease the number of bins
with regular histograms.
But how do you think this
changes when using heatmaps?
You see, as you increase
the bins you get the same effect.
Every data point starts to
fall into its own category.
So you get a more clear picture.
But everything eventually is just
one color since every data point
ends up being unique.
Now a legend is important and
heatmaps are no different.
When using the pyplot scripting layer,
this is as easy as calling
the pyplot colorbar function.
Be warned though,
there's lots of accounting and bookkeeping
happening there under the hood.
In fact, pyplot is finding
the current rendered image,
generating the colorbar,
resizing the existing axes and
using gridspec to add a new
axes the size of the colorbar.
It's quite a bit of bookkeeping.
And that's all there is to this though.
Now that you've seen this data in
two different ways, a heatmap,
where you have an X, a Y,
and a color dimension, and
a scatterplot, where you have two
histograms, one for each axis.
So which of these approaches
do you see yourself using
when you have density graphs that
you want to share with others?